follow.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: "Follow the Blog"
description: "There's lots of ways to do it"
nofollow: true
---

There are a few ways to get notified of new posts to the Mediocre Blog.

## Method 1: RSS

RSS is the classic way to follow any blog. Simply give any RSS reader the
following URL...

<a href="{{site.url}}/feed.xml">{{site.url}}/feed.xml</a>

...and posts from this blog will show up as soon as they are published.

There are literally thousands of RSS readers out there. Here's some
recommendations:

* [Google Chrome Browser Extension](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/rss-feed-reader/pnjaodmkngahhkoihejjehlcdlnohgmp)

* [spaRSS](https://f-droid.org/en/packages/net.etuldan.sparss.floss/) is my
  preferred android RSS reader, but you'll need to install
  [f-droid](https://f-droid.org/) on your device (a good thing to do anyway,
  imo).

* TODO: an iOS reader, for you Apple users. Someone please [email
  me](mailto:mediocregopher.com) a recommendation.


## Method 2: Twitter

New posts are automatically published to [my Twitter](https://twitter.com/{{
site.twitter_username }}). Simply follow me there and pray the algorithm smiles
upon my tweets enough to show them to you! :pray: :pray: :pray:

## Method 3: Email

I do solemnly swear to never ever ever:

* Email you anything that's not a notification about new blog posts.

* Give your email address to anyone for any reason.

* Track whether or not you've opened the emails, clicked the links inside, or
  anything like that. Delete every single one, I don't care.

With that out of the way... if you'd like to receive an email everytime a new
post is published just type in your email and hit "Subscribe" below!

<!-- Begin Mailchimp Signup Form -->
<link href="//cdn-images.mailchimp.com/embedcode/horizontal-slim-10_7.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css">
<style type="text/css">
	#mc_embed_signup{
    }
	/* Add your own Mailchimp form style overrides in your site stylesheet or in this style block.
	   We recommend moving this block and the preceding CSS link to the HEAD of your HTML file. */
</style>
<div id="mc_embed_signup">
<form action="https://gmail.us7.list-manage.com/subscribe/post?u=b01da7c6e6b3cb148e812a0fc&amp;id=e4559a9a22" method="post" id="mc-embedded-subscribe-form" name="mc-embedded-subscribe-form" class="validate" target="_blank" novalidate>
    <div id="mc_embed_signup_scroll">
	
	<input type="email" value="" name="EMAIL" class="email" id="mce-EMAIL" placeholder="email address" required>
    <!-- real people should not fill this in and expect good things - do not remove this or risk form bot signups-->
    <div style="position: absolute; left: -5000px;" aria-hidden="true"><input type="text" name="b_b01da7c6e6b3cb148e812a0fc_e4559a9a22" tabindex="-1" value=""></div>
    <div class="clear"><input type="submit" value="Subscribe" name="subscribe" id="mc-embedded-subscribe" class="button"></div>
    </div>
</form>
</div>
<!--End mc_embed_signup-->

Commit message:

Add follow button and spruce up the follow page

follow.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "Follow the Blog"
nofollow: true
---

Here's your options for receiving updates about new blog posts:

## Option 1: RSS

RSS is the classic way to follow any blog. It comes from a time before
aggregators like reddit and twitter stole the show, when people felt capable to
manage their own content feeds. We should use it again.

To follow over RSS give any RSS reader the following URL...

<a href="{{site.url}}/feed.xml">{{site.url}}/feed.xml</a>

...and posts from this blog will show up in your RSS feed as soon as they are
published. There are literally thousands of RSS readers out there. Here's some
recommendations:

* [Google Chrome Browser Extension](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/rss-feed-reader/pnjaodmkngahhkoihejjehlcdlnohgmp)

* [spaRSS](https://f-droid.org/en/packages/net.etuldan.sparss.floss/) is my
  preferred android RSS reader, but you'll need to install
  [f-droid](https://f-droid.org/) on your device (a good thing to do anyway,
  imo).

* TODO: an iOS reader, for you Apple users. Someone please [email
  me](mailto:mediocregopher.com) a recommendation.


## Option 2: Twitter

New posts are automatically published to [my Twitter](https://twitter.com/{{
site.twitter_username }}). Simply follow me there and pray the algorithm smiles
upon my tweets enough to show them to you! :pray: :pray: :pray:

## Option 3: Email

I do solemnly swear to never ever ever:

* Email you anything that's not a notification about new blog posts.

* Give your email address to anyone for any reason.

* Track whether or not you've opened the emails, clicked the links inside, or
  anything like that. Delete every single one, I don't care.

With that out of the way... if you'd like to receive an email everytime a new
post is published just type in your email and hit "Subscribe" below!

<!-- Begin Mailchimp Signup Form -->
<link href="//cdn-images.mailchimp.com/embedcode/horizontal-slim-10_7.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css">
<style type="text/css">
	#mc_embed_signup{
    }
	/* Add your own Mailchimp form style overrides in your site stylesheet or in this style block.
	   We recommend moving this block and the preceding CSS link to the HEAD of your HTML file. */
</style>
<div id="mc_embed_signup">
<form action="https://gmail.us7.list-manage.com/subscribe/post?u=b01da7c6e6b3cb148e812a0fc&amp;id=e4559a9a22" method="post" id="mc-embedded-subscribe-form" name="mc-embedded-subscribe-form" class="validate" target="_blank" novalidate>
    <div id="mc_embed_signup_scroll">
	
	<input type="email" value="" name="EMAIL" class="email" id="mce-EMAIL" placeholder="email address" required>
    <!-- real people should not fill this in and expect good things - do not remove this or risk form bot signups-->
    <div style="position: absolute; left: -5000px;" aria-hidden="true"><input type="text" name="b_b01da7c6e6b3cb148e812a0fc_e4559a9a22" tabindex="-1" value=""></div>
    <div class="clear"><input type="submit" value="Subscribe" name="subscribe" id="mc-embedded-subscribe" class="button"></div>
    </div>
</form>
</div>
<!--End mc_embed_signup-->
