---
title: >-
    New Year, New Resolution
description: >-
    This blog is about to get some action.
---

At this point I'm fairly well known amongst friends and family for my new year's
resolutions, to the point that earlier this month a friend of mine asked me
"What's it going to be this year?". In the past I've done things like no
chocoloate, no fast food, no added sugar (see a theme?), and no social media.
They've all been of the "I won't do this" sort, because it's a lot easier to
stop doing something than to start doing something new. Doing something new
inherently means _also_ not doing something else; there's only so many hours in
the day, afterall.

## This Year

This year I'm going to shake things up, I'm going to do something new. My
resolution is to have published 52 posts on this blog by Jan 1, 2022, 00:00 UTC.
Only one post per day can count towards the 52. A post must be "substantial" to
count towards the 52. A non-substantial post would be something like the 100
word essay about my weekend that I wrote in first grade, which went something
like "My weekend was really really really ('really' 96 more times) really really
boring".

Other than that, it's pretty open-ended.

## Why

My hope is that I'll get more efficient at writing these things. Usually I take
a lot of time to craft a post, weeks in some cases. I really appreciate those of
you that have taken the time to read them, but to be frank the time commitment
just isn't worth it. With practice I can hopefully learn what exactly I have to
say that others are interested in, and then go back to spending a lot of time
crafting the things being said.

Another part of this is going to be learning how to market myself properly,
something I've always been reticent to do. Our world is filled with people
shouting into the void of the internet, each with their own reasons for wanting
to be heard. Does it need another? Probably not. But here I am. I guess what I'm
really going to be doing is learning _why_ I want to do this; I know I want to
have others read what I write, but is it possible that that desire isn't
entirely selfish? Is it ok if it is?

Once I'm comfortable with why I'm doing this it will, hopefully, be easier to
figure out a marketing avenue I feel comfortable with putting a lot of energy
towards. There must be at least _one_...

So consider this #1, world. Only 51 to go.
